# Multi-Python, Single-Spec macro system

This repository contains a work-in-progress macro system generator for the singlespec python initiative.

### Dictionary

__flavor__ is a kind of python interpreter. At this point, we recognize the following flavors:
`python2`, `python3` and `pypy3`.

In place of flavor, you can encounter `python`. This is for compatibility reasons. In most places,
using `python` is either a redefinition of `python2` for compatibility reasons, or a stand-in for
"flavor-agnostic". Conditionals are in place to switch `python` to mean `python3` in the future.

The name of the flavor should be the name of the binary in `/usr/bin`. It is also used as a prefix
for all flavor-specific macros. Some macros are redefined with "short" flavor, such as `py2` for
`python2`, for compatibility reasons. All of them have a "long" form too.

__modname__ is the PyPI name, or, if the package in question is not on PyPI, the moniker that we
chose to stand in for it.

Packages adhering to the SUSE Python module naming policy are usually called `%{flavor}-%{modname}`.
In some cases, it is only `%{modname}` though.

__pkgname__, or __subpackage name__, is internal to a spec file, and is that thing you put after the
`%package` macro. Pkgname of the package itself is an empty string. Pkgname of a `%package -n
something` is at this point `-n something`, and denotes that this subpackage should not be handled
by the generator.  
That means that if you want a subpackage to be skipped, rename it from `%package foo` to
`%package -n %{name}-foo`.

The purpose of the singlespec system is to take a package called `%{flavor}-%{modname}` for a
particular flavor, and autogenerate subpackages `%{flavor}-%{modname}` for all the other flavors.
Alternately, it is to take package `python-%{modname}` and generate subpackages for all flavors,
leaving the top-level package empty.

### Macros

The following macros are considered public API:

__`%pythons`__ - list of flavors we are building for.

__`%have_python2`, `%have_python3`, `%have_pypy3`__. Defined as 1 if we are building for that
flavor. Undefined otherwise.

__`%{python_module modname [= version]}`__ expands to `$flavor-modname [= version]` for every
flavor. Intended as: `BuildRequires: %{python_module foo}`.

__`%ifpython2`, `%ifpython3`, `%ifpypy3`__: applies the following section only to subpackages of
that particular flavor.  
__`%ifpycache`__: applies the following section only to subpackages of flavors that generate a
`__pycache__` directory.

__`%python2_only`, `%python3_only`, `%pypy3_only`__: applies the contents of the line only to
subpackages of that particular flavor.  
__`%pycache_only`__: applies the contents of the line only to subpackages of flavors that generate
`__pycache__` directories. Useful in filelists: `%pycache_only %{python_sitelib}/__pycache__/*`

__`%python_build`__ expands to build instructions for  all flavors.

__`%python_install`__ expands to install instructions for all flavors.

__`%python_exec something.py`__ expands to `$flavor something.py` for all flavors, and moves around
the distutils-generated `build` directory so that you are never running python2 script with a
python3-generated `build`. This is only useful for distutils/setuptools.

__`%python_expand something`__ is a more general form of the above. Performs the moving-around for
distutils' `build` directory, and performs rpm macro expansion of its argument for every flavor.  
Importantly, `$python` is replaced by current flavor name, even in macros. So:  
`%{python_expand $python generatefile.py %$python_bin_suffix}`  
expands to:  
`python2 generatefile.py %python2_bin_suffix`  
`python3 generatefile.py %python3_bin_suffix`  
etc.

__`%python2_build`, `%python3_build`, `%pypy3_build`__ expands to build instructions for the
particular flavor.  
__`%python2_install`, `%python3_install`, `%pypy3_install`__ expands to install
instructions for the particular flavor.

__`%python_subpackages`__ expands to the autogenerated subpackages. This should go at the end of the
main headers section.

Alternative-related, general:

__`%prepare_alternative [-t <targetfile> ] <name>`__  replaces `<targetfile>` with a symlink to
`/etc/alternatives/<name>`, plus related housekeeping. If no `<targetfile>` is given, it is
`%{_bindir}/<name>`.

__`%install_alternative [-n ]<name> [-s <sourcefile>] [-t ]<targetfile> [-p ]<priority>`__  runs the
`update-alternative` command, configuring `<sourcefile>` alternative to be `<targetfile>`, with a
priority `<priority>`. If no `<sourcefile>` is given, it is `%{_bindir}/<name>`.  Can be followed by
additional arguments to `update-alternatives`, such as `--slave`.

__`%uninstall_alternative [-n ]<name> [-t ]<targetfile>`__  if uninstalling (not upgrading) the
package, remove `<targetfile>` from a list of alternatives under `<name>`

__`%alternative_to <file>`__ generates a filelist entry for `<file>` and a ghost entry for
`basename <file>` in `/etc/alternatives`

Alternative-related, for Python:

__`%python_alternative <file>`__: expands to filelist entries for `<file>`, its symlink in
`/etc/alternatives`, and the target file called `<file>-%python_bin_suffix`.  
In case the file is a manpage (`file.1.gz`), the target is called `file-%suffix.1.gz`.

__`%python_install_alternative <name>`__: runs `update-alternatives` for  `<name>-%{py_ver}`.

__`%python_uninstall_alternative <name>`__: reverse of the preceding.

Each of these has a flavor-specific spelling: `%python2_alternative` etc.

__`%python2_bin_suffix`, `%python3_bin_suffix`, `%pypy3_bin_suffix`__: what to put after
a binary name. Binaries for CPython are called `binary-%{python_version}`, for PyPy the name
is `binary-pp%{pypy3_version}`

In addition, the following flavor-specific macros are known and supported by the configuration:

__`%__python2`__: path to the $flavor executable.  
This exists mostly for Fedora compatibility. In SUSE code, it is preferable to use `$flavor`
directly, as it is specified to be the name in `/usr/bin`, and we don't support multiple competing
binaries (in the OBS environment at least).

__`%python2_sitelib`, `%python2_sitearch`__: path to noarch and arch-dependent `site-packages`
directory.

__`%python2_version`__: dotted major.minor version. `2.7` for CPython 2.7.  
__`%python2_version_nodots`__: concatenated major.minor version. `27` for CPython 2.7.

For reasons of preferred-flavor-agnosticity, aliases `python_*` are available for all of these.

We recognize `%py_ver`, `%py2_ver` and `%py3_ver` as deprecated spellings of `%flavor_version`. No
such shortcut is in place for `pypy3`. Furthermore, `%py2_build`, `_install` and `_shbang_opts`, as
well as `py3` variants, are recognized for Fedora compatibility.


### Files in repository

__`macros` directory__: contains a list of files that are concatenated to produce the resulting
`macros.python_all` file. This directory is incomplete, files `020-flavor-$flavor` and
`040-automagic` are generated by running the compile script.

__`macros/001-alternatives`__: macro definitions for alternatives handling. These are not
python-specific and might find their way into `update-alternatives`.

__`macros/010-common-defs`__: setup for macro spelling templates, common handling, preferred flavor
configuration etc.

__`macros/030-fallbacks`__: compatibility and deprecated spellings for some macros.

__`compile-macros.sh`__: the compile script. Builds flavor-specific macros, Lua script definition,
and concatenates all of it into `macros.python_all`

__`apply-macros.sh`__: compile macros and run `rpmspec` against first argument. Useful for examining
what is going on with your spec file.

__`flavor.in`__: template for flavor-specific macros. Generates `macros/020-flavor-$flavor` for
every flavor listed in `compile-macros.sh`.

__`macros.in`__: pure-RPM-macro definitions for the single-spec generator. References and uses the
private Lua macros.  The line `### LUA-MACROS ###` is replaced with inlined Lua macro definitions.

__`macros.lua`__: Lua macro definitions for the single-spec generator.  
This is actually pseudo-Lua: the top-level functions are not functions, and are instead converted to
Lua macro snippets. (That means that you can't call the top-level functions from Lua, and that you
need to place actual Lua functions inside a snippet, preferably the `_python_scan_spec()` snippet.)

__`macros-default-pythons`__: macro definitions for `%have_python2` and `%have_python3` for systems
where this is not provided by your Python installation. The spec file uses this for SUSE <= Leap 42.3.
`apply-macros` also uses it implicitly (for now).

__`embed-macros.pl`__: takes care of slash-escaping and wrapping the Lua functions and inserting
them into the `macros.in` file in order to generate the resulting macros.

__`python-rpm-macros.spec`__: spec file for the `python-rpm-macros` package generated from this
github repository.

__`process-spec.pl`__: Simple regexp-based converter into the singlespec format.

__`README.md`__: This file. As if you didn't know.
